

http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Donald_Knuth

	Beware of bugs in the above code; I have only proved it correct, not tried it.
	― Donald Knuth
	
* 注意上面代码里,我只保证他正确,但是我还没试过.

	By understanding a machine-oriented language, the programmer will tend to use
	a much more efficient method; it is much closer to reality.
	― Donald Knuth
	
	Premature optimization is the root of all evil.
	― Donald Knuth
	
* 过早的优化是万恶之源.

引用
http://programmers.stackexchange.com/questions/39/whats-your-favourite-quote-about-programming

	Debugging is twice as hard as writing the code in the first place. Therefore,
	if you write the code as cleverly as possible, you are, by definition, not 
	smart enough to debug it.
	― Brian W. Kernighan
	
	Walking on water and developing software from a specification are easy if both are frozen.
	― Edward V Berard

	It always takes longer than you expect, even when you take into account Hofstadter's Law. 
	― Hofstadter's Law
	
	In theory, there is no difference between theory and practice. But, in practice, there is.
	― Jan L. A. van de Snepscheut
	
	理论上来说,理论和实践是没有区别的.但是在实践中,他们是有的.
	
	Measuring programming progress by lines of code is like measuring aircraft building progress by weight.
	― Bill Gates
	
	Nine people can't make a baby in a month.
	― Fred Brooks, The Mythical Man-Month

	Debuggers don't remove bugs. They only show them in slow motion.
	
	If Java had true garbage collection, most programs would delete themselves upon execution.
	― Robert Sewell
	
	Computer Science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes
	― Edsger Dijkstra
	
	If debugging is the process of removing software bugs, then programming must be the process of putting them in.
	― Edsger Dijkstra
	
	编程就像是在 enbugging
	
	I have always wished for my computer to be as easy to use as my telephone; 
	my wish has come true because I can no longer figure out how to use my telephone
	―Bjarne Stroustrup
	
	Commenting your code is like cleaning your bathroom - you never want to do it, 
	but it really does create a more pleasant experience for you and your guests.
	― Ryan Campbell
	
	Programming is like sex: one mistake and you have to support it for the rest of your life.
	― Michael Sinz
	
	Given enough eyeballs, all bugs are shallow.
	― Linus's Law
	

分布式计算的八大谬论
-------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fallacies_of_Distributed_Computing

1. The network is reliable.
1. Latency is zero.
1. Bandwidth is infinite.
1. The network is secure.
1. Topology doesn't change.
1. There is one administrator.
1. Transport cost is zero.
1. The network is homogeneous.